Added preliminary HuC-3 documentation. (#433)
gbdev/pandocs: src/HuC1.md

# HuC1

HuC1 is an MBC used by some Game Boy games which, besides doing the
usual MBC stuff, also provides infrared communication. A lot of sources
on the internet said that HuC1 was “similar to MBC1”, but they didn’t

> provide any detail. I took a look, and it turns out that HuC1 differs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provide any detail. The HuC1 differs
```

Since we're here already, those kind of comments/remarks should be removed

Author: This page is basically copied from a jrra.zone blog post (hopefully with permission): http://jrra.zone/blog/huc1.html

I wasn’t editing it for style, I don’t know whether the license of the blog post would even allow that.  There’s no clear copyright notice/license on the original blog post, so Berne Convention automatic copyright/all rights reserved applies.

Reviewer 2: All content under Pan Docs has been licensed to the public domain, so that should be fine.

Author: I tightened up the wording in a few places. here.

from MBC1 quite a lot.

## Memory Map

Address range | Feature
--------------|------------------------------------
  $0000–1FFF  | RAM/IR select (when writing only)
  $2000–3FFF  | ROM bank select (when writing only)
  $4000–5FFF  | RAM bank select (when writing only)
  $6000–7FFF  | Nothing?
  $A000–BFFF  | Cart RAM or IR register

> ### 0000–1FFF IR Select (Write-Only)

Reviewer 2: I appreciate the effort, but the section title does not follow [the style guide](https://github.com/gbdev/pandocs/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#8-section-titles) anyway, so I am currently preparing a PR to fix that. (If you can follow it in the new docs, that would be very appreciated!)

Most MBCs let you disable the cartridge RAM to prevent accidental
writes. HuC1 doesn\'t do this, instead you use this register to switch
the A000–BFFF region between \"RAM mode\" and \"IR mode\" (described
below). Write $0E to switch to IR mode, and anything else to switch to
RAM mode. Nevertheless some HuC1 games attempt to write $0A and $00 to
this region as if it would enable/disable cart RAM.

### 2000–3FFF ROM Bank Number (Write-Only)

HuC1 can accept a bank number of at least 6 bits here.

### 4000–5FFF RAM Bank Select (Write-Only)

HuC1 can accept a bank number of at least 2 bits here.

### 6000–7FFF Nothing? (Write-Only)

Writes to this region seem to have no effect. Even so, some games do
write to this region, as if it had the same effect as on MBC1. You may
safely ignore these writes.

### A000–BFFF Cart RAM or IR register (Read/Write)

> When in \"IR mode\" (wrote $0E to 0000), the IR register is visible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When in \"IR mode\" (wrote $0E to $0000), the IR register is visible
```

Author: Well, I took the following from CONTRIBUTING.md to heart:

> To prevent clutter, don't use a prefix for hex numbers when it's clear from the context that a number is hexadecimal. For example, addresses and lists of opcodes. In those cases, zero-pad, even for smaller numbers: `0000-3FFF` instead of `0-3FFF`.

I padded addresses to four hexadecimal digits and didn’t add a prefix, as addresses are implied to be hexadecimal.  Should this rule be updated/clarified?

Reviewer 2: Fair that you're following the rules; I think that addresses in running text like this should get a hex prefix at least for consistency ("0E" is arguably unambiguous), and the prefix helps it stand out from other words.

here. Write to this region to control the IR transmitter. $01 turns it
on, $00 turns it off. Read from this region to see either $C1 (saw
light) or $C0 (did not see light). When in \"RAM mode\" (wrote

> something other than $0E to 0000) this region behaves like normal cart

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
something other than $0E to $0000) this region behaves like normal cart
```

# HuC1

HuC1 is an MBC developed by Hudson Soft. It implements ROM and RAM

> banking, and also provides infrared communication. Many sources on the

Reviewer 2: I disagree, the two consecutive "and"s would be confusing.

> internet said that HuC1 was “similar to MBC1”, without providing any

Reviewer: I would replace this with (starting with "Many sources on the", from the previous line)

```
Unlike generally believed, the HuC1 differs from MBC1 significantly.
```

Author: But that reads poorly in English – if you really want to rework it in that direction, it should be “Contrary to popular belief…”  But then you’re not explaining where the popular belief came from (i.e. these repeated claims on various web sites).

Anyway, if you want to endlessly argue about wording like this, count me out.  I have more important things to do.  I just wanted to get write up my findings on the HuC-3 while it was fresh in my mind after doing reverse-engineering and emulation work on it.

Reviewer 2: I don't think the "many sources on the Internet" part belongs in Pan Docs at all, which would solve the problem.

> Anyway, if you want to endlessly argue about wording like this, count me out. I have more important things to do. I just wanted to get write up my findings on the HuC-3 while it was fresh in my mind after doing reverse-engineering and emulation work on it.

Considering that all of the technical tidbits have been approved by both of us, I'd entirely understand if you decline to participate in the grammar/presentation bikeshedding; we can make phrasing changes ourselves. Regardless, thank you *very much* for your research, and for caring enough to reshare it. Know that it's appreciated.

Author: > I don't think the "many sources on the Internet" part belongs in Pan Docs at all, which would solve the problem.

Well, it gives historical context for JRRA’s comments, and it’s a sad fact that there are still many outdated websites that misleadingly say the HuC1 and HuC-3 are “similar to MBC1” or “similar to MBC5”.  It’s another thing carried over from the original blog post.

> banking, and also provides infrared communication. Many sources on the
> internet said that HuC1 was “similar to MBC1”, without providing any
> detail. However, the HuC1 differs from MBC1 significantly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
banking, and also provides infrared communication.
Despite many sources on the internet claiming that HuC1 is “similar to MBC1”, it actually differs from MBC1 significantly.
```
Is this a reasonable compromise?

Author: Yeah, that reads OK.
